document AOT lowering and compilation (#12204)
jax-ml/jax: docs/aot.md

# Ahead-of-time lowering and compilation

JAX offers several transformations, such as `jax.jit` and `jax.pmap`, returning
a function that is compiled and runs on accelerators or the CPU. As the JIT
acronym indicates, all compilation happens _just-in-time_ for execution.

Some situations call for _ahead-of-time_ (AOT) compilation instead. When you
want to fully compile prior to execution time, or you want control over when
different parts of the compilation process take place, JAX has some options for
you.

> First, let's review the stages of compilation. When a function `f` output by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, let's review the stages of compilation. When a function/callable `f` output by
```

{func}`jax.jit` is invoked with arguments, say `f(x, y)` where `x` and `y` are
arrays, JAX does the following in order:

> 1. **Specialize** `f` to properties of the arguments `x` and `y` (usually their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Stage out** a specialized version of the Python callable `f` to a jaxpr, specializing to an input type inferred from properties of the arguments `x` and `y` (usually their
```

I like the 'specialize' language so we should keep that word around, but I think 'staging out' is a more complete description and also better matches existing docs/comments throughout JAX. I say it's more complete because "specialize" by itself could mean just using `functools.partial`.

   shape and element type).

> 2. **Lower** this specialization to the XLA compiler's input language, HLO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Lower** this specialized and staged-out computation to the XLA compiler's input language, MHLO.
```

JAX lowers to MHLO now, so we probably should replace some occurrences of "HLO" with "MHLO" here.

3. **Compile** the lowered HLO program to produce an optimized executable for
   the target device (CPU, GPU, or TPU).

4. **Execute** the compiled executable with the arrays `x` and `y` as arguments.

JAX's AOT API gives you direct control over steps #2, #3, and #4 (but [not

> #1](#inspecting-specializations)), plus some other features along the way. An

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#1](#inspecting-staged-out-computations)), plus some other features along the way. An
```

example:

```python
>>> import jax
>>> import jax.numpy as jnp
>>> import numpy as np

>>> def f(x, y): return 2 * x + y
>>> x, y = 3, 4

>>> lowered = jax.jit(f).lower(x, y)

>>> # Print lowered HLO
>>> print(lowered.as_text())
module @jit_f.0 {
  func.func public @main(%arg0: tensor<i32>, %arg1: tensor<i32>) -> tensor<i32> {
    %0 = mhlo.constant dense<2> : tensor<i32>
    %1 = mhlo.multiply %0, %arg0 : tensor<i32>
    %2 = mhlo.add %1, %arg1 : tensor<i32>
    return %2 : tensor<i32>
  }
}

>>> compiled = lowered.compile()

>>> # Query for cost analysis, print FLOP estimate
>>> compiled.cost_analysis()[0]['flops']
2.0

>>> # Execute the compiled function!
>>> compiled(x, y)
DeviceArray(10, dtype=int32)
```

See the {mod}`jax.stages` documentation for more details on what functionality
the lowering and compiled functions provide.

In place of `jax.jit` above, you can also `lower(...)` the result of
{func}`jax.pmap`, as well as `pjit` and `xmap` (from
{mod}`jax.experimental.pjit` and {mod}`jax.experimental.maps` respectively). In
each case, you can `compile()` the result similarly.

> All optional arguments to `jit`---such as `static_argnums` and `device`---are

Reviewer: FYI I think we want to deprecate and remove `device` soon, so we might want to avoid referring to it (so as to have less to update later).

DeviceArray([[ 1.,  5.,  9.],
             [13., 17., 21.],
             [25., 29., 33.],
             [37., 41., 45.]], dtype=float32)

>>> jax.vmap(g_aot)(zs)
TypeError: Cannot apply JAX transformations to a function lowered and compiled for a particular signature. Detected argument of Tracer type <class 'jax.interpreters.batching.BatchTracer'>.
```

A similar error is raised when `g_aot` is involved in autodiff
(e.g. {func}`jax.grad`). For consistency, transformation by `jax.jit` is
disallowed as well, even though `jit` does not meaningfully modify its
argument's type signature.

## Debug information and analyses, when available

In addition to the primary AOT functionality (separate and explicit lowering,
compilation, and execution), JAX's various AOT stages also offer some additional
features to help with debugging and gathering compiler feedback.

For instance, as the initial example above shows, lowered functions often offer
a text representation. Compiled functions do the same, and also offer cost and
memory analyses from the compiler. All of these are provided via methods on the
{class}`jax.stages.Lowered` and {class}`jax.stages.Compiled` objects (e.g.,

> `lowered.as_text()` and `compiled.cost_analysis()` above).

Reviewer 2: Maybe link to the API docs to get a full list?

Reviewer 2: NVM already linked nearby and elsewhere!

These methods are meant as an aid for manual inspection and debugging, not as a
reliably programmable API. Their availability and output vary by compiler,
platform, and runtime. This makes for two important caveats:

1. If some functionality is unavailable on JAX's current backend, then the
   method for it returns something trivial (and `False`-like). For example, if
   the compiler underlying JAX does not provide a cost analysis, then
   `compiled.cost_analysis()` will be `None`.

2. If some functionality is available, there are still very limited guarantees
   on what the corresponding method provides. The return value is not required
   to be consistent---in type, structure, or value---across JAX configurations,
   backends/platforms, versions, or even invocations of the method. JAX cannot
   guarantee that the output of `compiled.cost_analysis()` on one day will
   remain the same on the following day.

When in doubt, see the package API documentation for {mod}`jax.stages`.

> ## Inspecting specializations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Inspecting staged-out computations
```

> Stage #1 in the list at the top of this note mentions specialization, prior to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stage #1 in the list at the top of this note mentions specialization and staging, prior to
```
